# using-vcham
How to use VCHam - a program to calculate the vibronic coupling Hamiltonian.

## VCHam toolbox

**vcpnt101**, generates quantum chemistry input files (e.g. g09) for point along a chosen normal mode

**vctrans101**, reads data from quantum chemistry output files (generated by vcpnt) and formats for use in vchfit

**vchfit101**, fits curves to potential energy curves along a normal mode 

## Example usage

In this example there are 30 normal modes and 5 electronic states.

#### vcpnt

	vcpnt101 pnts.inp

will generate input files along a chosen normal mode according to pnts.inp; 
Here is an example pnts.inp file:

	file0 = structure1.log
	nmodes = 30
	fileout = structure1
	opening = open.dat
	closing = close.dat
	formout = gaussian
	along 01 10 1.0

	end-input

Where,

- **file0**, the output for a R0 frequency calculation (e.g. opt, freq in g09);

- **nmodes**, the total number of normal modes (3N-6 for non-linear molecules)

- **fileout**, the title of the files to be generated by vcpnt. They will be this title followed by the mode number and the number of deviations left or right from the R0 position (as read from file0 = structure1.log) separated by underscores.

- **opening**, this specifies a special file containing the opening for a g09 template input file (before the geometry section).

- **closing**, this specifies a special file containing the closing for a g09 template input file (after the geometry section).

- **formout**, specifies the format of the files generated by vcpnt; in this case gaussian 

- **along**, specifies the mode number, number of deviations (left and right) from the R0 position, and the spacing (not sure of units, normal mode coordinates?) 1.0 is a standard value


Then, run the generated g09 calculations (will take a while). 

#### vctrans

Next, use vctrans to transform the data from the g09 output files to nice format and for use in vchfit,

```
vctrans101 trans.inp
```

As this must be done for every mode, use a template file such as 'trans_xx.inp', which contains 'xx' in place of where the mode number should be. Here's an example 'trans_xx.inp':

	file0 = hpfreq.log
	nmodes = 156
	orient=Standard
	abinitiotype =  tddft            #ttddft for triplets
	energy0 = -1288.75520321
	states = 1,2,3,4,5
	order = 0
	
	files
	pnts_xx_000.log 1
	pnts_xx_000.log 2
	pnts_xx_000.log 3
	pnts_xx_000.log 4
	pnts_xx_000.log 5
	end-files
	
	datasets
	 qxx.set
	end-datasets
	
	end-input

Then we can just, 

```
for i in {1..30}
do
sed "s/xx/$i/g" trans_xx.inp > trans_$i.inp
done
```

The trans.inp files reference a 'q.set' file which is a list of g09 log files which VCHam reads from. Similarly, just use a template file 'qxx.set', e.g:

	pnts_xx_10l.log 1
	pnts_xx_10l.log 2
	pnts_xx_10l.log 3
	pnts_xx_10l.log 4
	pnts_xx_10l.log 5
	pnts_xx_09l.log 1
	pnts_xx_09l.log 2
	pnts_xx_09l.log 3
	pnts_xx_09l.log 4
	pnts_xx_09l.log 5
	...
	pnts_xx_01l.log 1
	pnts_xx_01l.log 2
	pnts_xx_01l.log 3
	pnts_xx_01l.log 4
	pnts_xx_01l.log 5
	pnts_xx_10r.log 1
	pnts_xx_10r.log 2
	pnts_xx_10r.log 3
	pnts_xx_10r.log 4
	pnts_xx_10r.log 5
	pnts_xx_09r.log 1
	pnts_xx_09r.log 2
	pnts_xx_09r.log 3
	pnts_xx_09r.log 4
	pnts_xx_09r.log 5
	...
	pnts_xx_01r.log 1
	pnts_xx_01r.log 2
	pnts_xx_01r.log 3
	pnts_xx_01r.log 4
	pnts_xx_01r.log 5
	end-files
 
Generate q1.set, q2.set, etc.,

```
for i in {1..30}
do
sed "s/xx/$i/g" qxx.set > q$i.set
done
```

Then run vctrans on all the trans.inp files,

```
for i in trans*.inp
do
vctrans101 $i
done
```

To generate a 'trans.info' file for each mode. They can be plotted with vcplot, e.g. 

```
vcplot101 trans_1.inp
```

#### vcfit

To fit the PECs along each normal mode, Fit-x-1.inp, Fit-x-2.inp and Fit-x-3.inp files must be used. Here is an example Fit-x-2.inp:

	infofile = trans_x.info
	adiab2_mod
	mctdh_op
	
	iter = 64
	
	fit_select = x
	
	symmode = A
	
	cpmode = 1 2 B  cpmode = 1 3 A  cpmode = 1 4 B  cpmode = 1 5 B
	cpmode = 2 3 B  cpmode = 2 4 A  cpmode = 2 5 A
	cpmode = 3 4 B  cpmode = 3 5 B
	cpmode = 4 5 A
	
	diabatic_function
	end-define
	
	kappafit
	lambdafit
	gammafit
	
	guess=fitx-1.vcham
	#use_cons
	
	constraints-section
	end-constraints-section
	
	end-input

This file involves the cpmode section which is the coupling between states. In this case, we have a molecule with C2 symmetry. The ground state (1) is always of symmetry A; in this case, the 1st excited singlet is of irrep B so the overall irrep is B because AuB = B (and AuA = A, and BuB = A). Thus, we have 'cpmode = 1 2 B', that is, irrep B between states 1 and 2 (ground and 1st excited singlet). Note the cpmode section is there only to speed up the fitting as it allows certain matrix elements to be 0 due to symmetry. We can omit the entire section and proceed, albeit slower computationally. A molecule of C1 symmetry for example has no advantage of cpmode. If that were the case, just omit the cpmode section. 

We actually use three of these for different fitting algorithms, eventually obtaining a good final fit. They differ by lambdafit (fit01), then gammafit (fit02), then we fill out the diabatic_function section to use quartic terms (fit03),

	diabatic_function
	01 1 quartic
	01 2 quartic
	01 3 quartic
	01 4 quartic
	01 5 quartic
	end-define

Also 'guess=' becomes uncommented for fit02 and fit03, using the corresponding previous fit as its guess.
To fit we have to generate fit01, fit02, and fit03 for each mode e.g. fit-1-1.inp, fit-1-2.inp, fit-1-3.inp, fit-2-1.inp, fit-2-2.inp, fit-2-3.inp, ... , up to fit-30-1.inp, fit-30-2.inp, fit-30-3.inp. Use a template file and sed again,

```
for i in {1..30}
do
sed "s/xx/$i/g" fit_xx-1.inp > fit_$i-1.inp
sed "s/xx/$i/g" fit_xx-2.inp > fit_$i-2.inp
sed "s/xx/$i/g" fit_xx-3.inp > fit_$i-3.inp
done
```

Then run the fitting e.g.,

```
for i in fit*.inp 
do
vchfit101 $i
done
```

This works because fit_xx-1.inp is listed before fit_xx-2.inp which are both before fit_xx-3.inp in bash; try it by

```
ls -l fit*.inp
```

The fittings must be in order 1,2,3, because fit2 uses info from fit1 as a first guess, and fit3  uses fit2 as a first guess.

Finally, they can be plotted again including the fitted lines. Usually we plot fit3, the most accurate fit,

```
vcplot101 fit-1-3
```

